Hello, welcome to the overview of Ask Data for a technical audience.
This video has been created for
anyone needing to understand Ask Data from a technical perspective.
So, for this section, we will look at how
Ask Data functions at a high level - before diving into a description of the underlying process architecture.
We’ll also look at some resources that can help customers obtain the best results when using Ask Data.
The Ask Data feature was introduced in Tableau 2019.1, with major enhancements to Ask Data subsequently delivered in 2021.2.
Ask Data allows customers to use natural language
to ask questions and produce insights directly
from any data source
published on Tableau Server or Tableau Online.
Ask Data enables customers to type a question into a text box
using natural language
and Tableau will produce an answer in the form of a Viz.
Ask Data supports many of the analytical capabilities of Tableau, including grouping, sorting, filtering and aggregations.
If you would like an excellent introduction and overview of Ask Data,
you can view the presentation delivered by Product Manager
Jared Briskman at Tableau Conference 2021,
which is linked in this course.
Lenses are a new content type, like a published workbook or Prep flow, specifically for Ask Data,
and are required for versions 2021.2 and on.
Lenses are created on top of published data sources, and allow for the curation and governance
of Ask Data use cases, while maintaining the source of truth of the data source.
A published data source can have no lenses (which is the default), a single lens, or multiple lenses.
Lenses allow for the curation of Ask Data, and introduce the ability to select which fields are available for the Ask Data user.
Lenses must be authored by Explorer or Creator licensed users, but are accessible by viewers.
The bottom line of this is that: no lens means no Ask Data access.
Let’s take a look at what’s needed to interact with Ask Data on Tableau Server or Tableau Online.
Ask Data requires a published data source, and to use Ask Data,
users must have permission to connect to the underlying data source.
One thing to keep in mind is that If a data source has row-level permissions,
those permissions also apply to Ask Data,
which won’t recognize secure values or make related statistical recommendations.
Now, starting with version 2021.2, a Creator or Explorer must first author a “Lens” to access a published datasource using Ask Data.
A Lens should include fields relevant to a specific use case identified by the Lens Author.
Lens authors can create “synonyms” for fields to help business users ask questions using natural language.
An example of a “synonym” might be to add the words “best” “best performing”
or “top”
to represent the TOP 5 results from a dataset.
Ask Data is tightly integrated with several services, but it relies especially on two:
Natural Language Processing, or NLP, as well as Elastic Server.
Here’s an example of how Ask Data and Elastic Server appear in the TSM Web UI and in the TSM CLI.
The Ask Data feature relies on several Tableau services working together, which you
can see here.
These include Data Server, as well as VizQL Server,
Columbo, which is a part of TabAdmin agent
which helps microservices find things, NLP,
Elastic Server, and Content Model Microservice, or CMM for short.
By default, the Ask Data processes install to node 1.
The Ask Data service can not be configured manually
and will run automatically on any node running
Data Server.
Now, we're going to take a look at the Tableau services which Ask Data relies on.
Ask Data is Natural Language Processing, which is abbreviated NLP.
This is a translation layer that helps the user submit a query into Vizql without dragging and dropping.
Ask Data is tightly integrated with Vizql and DataServer.
It gets information from both Elastic Server and Content Model Microservice (CMM),
but Elastic Server and CMM do not coordinate with each other directly, which we'll cover a little bit later.
Ask Data logs natural language queries issued by users in log files for the NLP service, which is managed by TSM.
Next up, let's take a look at Elastic Server.
Elastic Server is a wrapper process for elastic search, which is a standard, open source search engine, like SOLR.
Elasticsearch is the process that helps Ask Data "learn" the data source,
by collecting the fields
and values contained in the data to create more responsive search results.
TSM manages starting, running and serving elasticsearch through Elastic Server, and the data is stored on Elastic Server.
When a datasource has changed or been added,
Elastic Server is notified to relearn the data source.
Now in this context, learning the data source
means to profile the data to leverage statistics about the range and distribution of the data.
This also pulls out categories from dimensions and summarizes measures.
The Elastic Server’s role of learning the contents of a published data source is essential for the processing of Ask Data.
The logs of elastic search are in the
logs/elasticsearch directory.
There are elastic specific logs, and stdout logs that only show the startup part of the logs.
Now let’s take a look at Content Model Microservice, or CMM.
CMM is deployed inside the Interactive
Microservice Container.
This service is responsible for providing the list of fields
and associated metadata
from a Tableau Data Source, such as the field’s data type, aggregation type,
calculation formulas,
remote columns, whether it's in a folder or hierarchy, all of which is written to PostgresQL.
If you see any problems with this service, you should check the Interactive Microservice Logs folder for more information.
Now, the Interactive Microservices Container is not configurable and is deployed on nodes that have vizportal.
Now let's look at Navigating logs for Ask Data.
Ask Data adds an additional layer of processing to the existing Vizql and Data Server
Processes
that are used to build a viz on Tableau Server.
An Ask Data query traverses multiple log
files as it is fulfilled,
including the Gateway, VizPortal, Data Server, and VizQLServer.
The NLP log corresponds to the Ask Data process in TSM.
When the NLP (or Ask Data) service starts,
it will print the text “A natural language service”,
which is shown highlighted in orange here on the screen.
If the phrase "A natural language service" appears more than once in the logs, it means that the Ask Data service was restarted.
Once all the Ask Data services are active, the logs print the phrase “GRPC server listening on port”
- this indicates that the NLP is on and running.
One key you'll need to trace these logs is to know that the ID in the stdout_nlp logs will lead you to the UUID
in the nativeapi_vizqlserver logs.
When working a support case for Ask Data,
try to identify the correct User ID (nuser_action-id).
from the stdout_nlp log.
You should also use timestamps to make sure you are tracking the right requests.
Now, I know that was a lot of information in a short amount of time,
so let’s summarize a few of the key takeaways for Troubleshooting Ask Data:
We need to ensure that all of the necessary processes are running on Tableau Server.
We can ask the questions: Has Ask Data been enabled at the Server/Site-Level?
Does the user have permission to the underlying published data source?
Has a Lens been created for the published data source the customer wants to access?
Does the customer have the appropriate permissions to access the published data source?
If a customer is having trouble authoring a Lens, are they an Explorer or Creator?
You can also Trace a user request using a timestamp, ID and UUID
in the stdout_nlp and nativeapi_vizqlserver logs
If you run into additional issues with Ask Data, you can reach out to the dev team for help on slack in #ask-data-help.
Now keep in mind that Ask Data can not be manually configured,
however, Tableau does provide recommendations to ensure that customers get the best results.
For improved performance and support for large data sets, customers should use Ask Data with published extracts rather than live data sources.
A Lens should only include fields relevant to a specific business use case.
Lens Authors should engage business users to discover which Lenses they need:
They should see, What questions do business people ask?
What do they need to know?
For additional tips on how customers can get the best results from Ask Data,
review the Online Help page titled “Optimize Data for Ask Data”, which is also linked in this training.
Thank you very much for your time, this has been an overview of Ask Data for a technical audience.